>> In today's fast-paced world,
many of us feel that time is
a luxury we just don't have.
But what would happen
if we had no way
of telling the passing of time?
A group of volunteers isolated
in a French cave for 40 days
recently found out.
This is "Gaia News."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This group of 15
French volunteers
were part of a study
called Deep Time, which
set out to explore human
adaptability to isolation.
Christian Clot, an explorer
and the project director,
was also one of the volunteers.
>> The main objective
for "Deep Time"
mission was really to
understand how human beings,
a group of human beings,
can adapt when suddenly dive
in a situation without one
of the most important things
in our life, which is time.
I mean, everything
is time in our life.
We're always watching
our watch or smartphone
and suddenly you're
out of time, you
don't have this information.
What happened to brain?
What happened for
the social situation?
What happened for the genetic?
What happened for everything
you are as a human being,
as a group?
This was merely to try
to understand that.
>> The group of seven women
and eight men spent 40 days
in a large cave in
southwest France,
where the temperature
was 50 degrees Fahrenheit
and the humidity 100%.
They had no phones,
clocks or means
of communicating with
the outside world.
They did, however, have
plenty to occupy their time.
>> Inside the cave we had
a lot of things to do.
We had, of course,
scientific studies,
some devices we had to
use, a lot of things
about how we were as a
human being inside the cave.
Our kind of work we had to
do is, of course, organizing
our camp, organizing everything
about toilets, about water,
about cooking.
It was the equivalent of
eight hours of work each day
per person.
>> While the participants had no
direct contact with the outside
world, they were being closely
monitored by scientific
equipment throughout
the 40 days.
>> The main work we had was
the studies about human beings
and what were our
adaptation inside the cave.
So we had a small
piece we swallow
to have the inside temperature,
the following of our heartbeat,
following of our movement with
a system called Actometer.
Afterwards, we have
all about emotions.
What were our emotions, our
perceptions, our understanding
of the situation?
We had the questionnaires
and things like that.
And of course, we had
equipment like EEG,
which is able to monitor our
brain in fact, inside the cave.
We had just before and
after entering the cave
and after getting out
of the cave some MRI.
And we have thousands of
data now we have to analyze.
>> While all this scientific
data will take time to analyze,
what was the
experience itself like?
>> The experience in itself was
at the beginning of it, hard.
We were discovering
new situation.
We had, it was
cold, it was humid.
But after some days, some
cycles, as we called them,
we feel that we find solutions
and we were happy in the cave.
And suddenly we arrive
at 32 days, 32 cycles.
And someone came and told
us, hey guys, it's the end.
You spent 40 days in the cave.
And it was unbelievable.
We didn't want to go outside,
because we had job to do.
So it was, well, I don't
want to go outside,
I have to finish my work here.
>> So what happened to the
volunteer sense of time?
>> We have to
analyze all the data,
but why suddenly we had an
average of 32 hours per day
and not 24 hours no more.
It's a huge discovery we
have on this expedition.
>> What are researchers most
hoping to prove with this
study?
>> We always thought as human
being that it's our biology
will dictate us our rhythm.
But obviously, it's
not the biology.
It's our brain.
And mainly, most the brain of
one person is the team brain.
I mean, the whole team
works all together
and finally this was a biggest
synchronizer than biology.
We prove two things.
First thing is, when you
are a group of people
and you have a goal, you have a
reason, you have a perspective,
it's much easier
to face and to deal
with a new kind of situation.
So we need to have a goal.
That's the first thing.
The second thing is, we
need absolutely diversity.
I mean, if you are alone,
you can't do anything.
>> Once all the
data is analyzed,
what could the applications be?
>> All human beings on Earth
right now will face new
challenges, new
kinds of situations.
And because of the climate,
because of technologies,
because of a lot of
reasons will push us
in new kinds of situations.
And we need to understand
more what happens in the brain
when these happen and how we
can help a human being to face
these kind of conditions.
That's the first thing.
Of course, we consider
going to the moon or Mars.
This will be really important.
We'll have submarines,
persons working in the mine,
all these people
need to understand
more will happen when
you are out of time.
>> So how did the volunteers
feel when they finally left
the cave?
>> We eventually got outside,
because it was the idea
of the experimentation, and
then we saw the sun and we feel
the hot of the sun on
our body and our skin.
And we saw trees.
And it was green, it was blue,
and all these kind of colors
we do not have in the cave.
It was beautiful.
It was like a birth, you know.
We were like seeing
the world again.
>> While researchers
await the results,
there's a good deal of
excitement around just what
the data will show about humans'
seemingly impressive capacity
for adaptation.
For new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."